# 015. Clean Code

## Guidelines for writing code
**Code is mainly communication between people**

"Make reading easy, even if it makes writing harder"

"Later equals never"

"There is nothing as permanent as a temporary solution"
### DRY - Don't repeat yourself
As a programmer, you want to avoid repeating code. If you notice you are writing the same code in multiple places, move it into functions/methods etc.

## Commenting

Can be used for explaining why something is in the code.

The code should be self explanatory.

## Naming
To give clear and describing names on variables, methods etc. is one of the most important things you can do to make the code easy to read.

#### Best practice

Uniformity:
+ Use English. 
+ Do the same way in your code. Example: Don't call some students students and other students pupils. 
+ Do the same way as the people you're working with.

**Verb / Nouns**
+ Verb for name of methods and functions: public string GetName()
+ Nouns for name of variables, classes and objects: 
	+ Singular for single variables: string name;
	+ Plural for collections: string[] names
	+ Bool variables often start with: is/are/has

**Distinct names**
Don't use similar names. Give everything distinct names

Don't do this:
public double[] CalculateAreaForAll(Circle[] circles)
public double[] CalculatedAreaForAll(Circle[] circles)

**Keep names as short as possible**
Keep out unnecessary words. The shorter the name gets, the more readable it is.

### Methods / Functions
+ Keep methods as short as possible
+ Every method should only do one thing, without side effects.
+ Methods should have as few parameters as possible
+ [The stepdown rule](https://github.com/Geeksltd/Programming.Tips/blob/master/docs/methods/stepdown-rule.md) - We should organize our code so that we can read it top-down. Define methods in the order of abstraction, highest abstraction should be followed by lesser abstraction and so on.

**Pronounceable**
Use words that are easy to pronounce.
xdf98d is hard name to pronounce, don't use it.

**Clarity over entertainment value**
Don't use puns. Use boring clear names.

**Case**
camelCase = In C#: Local variables and parameters.
PascalCase = In C#: Everything else (ex: Classes, Methods, Properties)
kebab-case = Not used in C#
snake_case = Not used in C#

### Magic numbers
Avoid magic numbers.
```c#
int numberOfDays;
//7 & 5 = magic numbers.
if (numberOfDays / 7 < 5) {}

//Better:
int numberOfDays;
int numberOfDaysPerWeek = 7;
int numberOfWeeks = numberOfDays / numberOfDaysPerWeek;
int numberOfVacationsWeeks;
bool hasVacationWeeksLeft = numberOfWeeks < numberOfVacationWeeks;

if (hasVacationWeeksLeft)
{
	Console.WriteLine("Mmmm");
}
```

