
# 020. Asynchronous programming

## Synchronous programming
Everything is executed in order. A computer is made from the beginning to do this. Already before multiple CPU cores (80's) -> concurrency, multi-tasking -> you could make it look like things were executed (processed) in the same time (Have multiple applications running at the same time for example.)

```C#
//Example
GetKettle();
FillKettle();
BoilWater();
GetCup();
AddTea();
PourWater();
```

## Asynchronous programming 
Multiple executions at once for example. Multiple CPU cores made it possible to same things at once.

```c#
GetKettle();
FillKettle();
BoilWaterAsync(); //This runs while other code keeps on running
GetCup();
AddTea();
Await boiling water(); //Not correct syntax :-)
PourWater();
```

### I/O -bound

Input/output - describes the flow of data through an interface. Also happens inside a computer -  for example between CPU and GPU, hard drive, network etc.

CPU can communicate with external I/O units asynchronously - CPU gives order to something,, and can keep running main application until the order is ready to deliver.

### CPU-bound
Tell a core of the CPU to work on advanced algorithm while the main application keeps on running.

## Concurrency, Parallellism, Threads and Tasks in C#

### Concurrency / Time slicing
Do multiple things in the same time with one resource - one CPU core. 

```c#
//The CPU multitaskes - do a little of everything. Two queues that are worked on a little bit at a time.

//Do a little bit of task 1
//Jump to another task and so on...
```

### Parallellism
Do multiple things at the same time with multiple resources.
Different CPU cores work on different things at the same time.

### Modern computer
Works with both concurrency and parallellism - Every CPU core has the ability to work with concurrency / time slicing.

## Multitasking, Multithreading, Multiprocessing

### Multitasking
The concurrent execution of multiple processes
#### Processes (Code, data)
Every process gets it's own protected space in memory from OS. The process won't be able to access other parts of the memory.

#### Single thread processes and multithread process.

Sends requests to ->
#### OS 
Has access to all computer resources, gives resources to processes, schedules processes 

### Multithreading
The ability of a processor to execute multiple threads concurrently.
Process with code, data and x number of threads.
Each thread can be sent to a different core of the CPU to work parallelly.

#### Thread
A thread is an entity within a process that can be scheduled for execution.
Also, it is the smallest unit of processing that can be performed in an OS:

### Multiprocessing
The use of two or more central processing units(CPUs)/CPU cores within a single computer system.

## Task manager

#### Lists processes
**Apps** - Programs with GUI
**Background processes** - processes that run in the background
**Windows processes** - OS background processes
## Performance
Number of processes - Each process has x number of threads that need to be executed.


## Threads, tasks and threadpool
In modern C# the .NET classes Thread and Threadpool should not be used directly in most cases.

### Thread
Represents an actual OS-level thread, with its own stack and kernel resources. While Thread allows the highest degree of control, it can be quite tricky to juggle the low level aspects of multi threading manually

Another problem with Thread is that OS threads are costly. Each thread consumes a non-trivial amount of memory for its stack, and adds additional CPU overhead.

### Threadpool
Is a wrapper around a pool of threads maintained by the CLR, that allows for low level control of the pool.

A thread pool maintains multiple threads waiting for tasks to be allocated for concurrent execution. The use of a thread pool avoids the overhead of creating too many threads and is instead reusing the threads in the pool to work through the queued tasks.

### Task Parallell Library (TPL) [TPL](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/standard/parallel-programming/task-parallel-library-tpl)
Starting with the .NET Framework 4, the TPL is the preferred way to write multithreaded and parallell code.

### PLINQ
Parallell implementation of the LINQ pattern. Power of LINQ combined with parallell execution.  


## Task and Task\<TResult\> classes

A future (or promise) is a type that represents some operation that will complete in the future. The modern future types in .NET are Task and Task\<TResult\>.

future = reference to a operation that sometime in the future will be done.

### Task
The task class represents a single operation that does not return a value and that usually executes asynchronously.

### Task \<Tresult\>
Represents a single operation that returns a value and that usually executes asynchronously.

### Task code example

```C#
//Tasks

Run() creates and starts task

Task myTask = Task.Run(Task1);

for (int i = 0; i < 600; i++)
{
    Console.WriteLine($"Main thread: {i}");
}

Console.WriteLine("The end!");

//Waits for task to complete, but locks the thread in waiting. Synchronous wait.
//This ususally isn't what you want to do.
myTask.Wait();

static void Task1()
{
    for (int i = 0; i < 1000; i++)
    {
        Console.WriteLine($"Task 1: {i}");
    }
}

//Lambda way + how to create a task, and later running it.
//Task<TResult>
Task<int> task1 = new Task<int>(() =>
{
    int sum = 0;
    for (int i = 0; i < 100; i++)
    {
        sum += i;
        Console.WriteLine($"Counting. Sum: {sum}");
    }
    return sum;
});

//Status property, returning status of task.
Console.WriteLine($"task1 is {task1.Status}");

//Starts task
task1.Start();

Task task2 = Task.Run(() =>
{
    for (int i = 0; i < 100; i++)
    {
        Console.WriteLine(i);
    }
});


//Creates a new task that will start running when the task is finished: In the example
// task 1 will finish counting then the codeblock will run.
task1.ContinueWith(task =>
{
    Console.WriteLine($"Result of task1: {task.Result}");
});


Console.WriteLine($"task1 is {task1.Status}");

Console.WriteLine("The end");

Console.ReadKey();

//Result also blocks the thread.
//task1.Result();
```